Add documentation about info/facts module development (#71250)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/dev_guide/developing_modules_general.rst

   ``$ . venv/bin/activate && . hacking/env-setup``

Creating an info or a facts module
==================================

Ansible gathers information about the target machines using facts modules, and gathers information on other objects or files using info modules.

> If you find yourself trying to add ``state: info`` or ``state: list`` to an existing module that is often a sign that a new dedicated ``_facts`` or ``_info`` module is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you find yourself trying to add ``state: info`` or ``state: list`` to an existing module, that is often a sign that a new dedicated ``_facts`` or ``_info`` module is needed.
```

> Ansible 2.8 and onwards, we have two type of facts modules, they are ``*_info`` and ``*_facts``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Ansible 2.8 and onwards, we have two type of information modules, they are ``*_info`` and ``*_facts``.
```

If a module is named ``<something>_facts``, it should be because its main purpose is returning ``ansible_facts``. Do not name modules that do not do this with ``_facts``.
Only use ``ansible_facts`` for information that is specific to the host machine, for example network interfaces and their configuration, which operating system and which programs are installed.

> Modules that query/return general information (and not ``ansible_facts``) should be named ``_info``. General information is non-host specific information,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modules that query/return general information (and not ``ansible_facts``) should be named ``_info``. General information is non-host specific information.
```

> for example information on online/cloud services (you can access different accounts for the same online service from the same host), or information on VMs and containers accessible from the machine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for example information on online/cloud services (you can access different accounts for the same online service from the same host), or information on VMs and containers accessible from the machine, or information on individual files or programs.
```

> for example information on online/cloud services (you can access different accounts for the same online service from the same host), or information on VMs and containers accessible from the machine, or information on individual files or programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the ``_info`` module could gather information on online/cloud services (you can access different accounts for the same online service from the same host), or information on VMs and containers accessible from the machine, or information on individual files or programs.
```

Info and facts modules, are just like any other Ansible Module, with a few minor requirements:

1. They MUST be named ``<something>_info`` or ``<something>_facts``, where <something> is singular

> 2. Info ``*_info`` modules MUST return in the form of the :ref:`result dictionary<common_return_values>` so other modules can access them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Info ``*_info`` modules MUST return in the form of the :ref:`result dictionary<common_return_values>` so other modules can access them.
```

3. Fact ``*_facts`` modules MUST return in the ``ansible_facts`` field of the :ref:`result dictionary<common_return_values>` so other modules can access them.
4. They MUST support :ref:`check_mode <check_mode_dry>`
5. They MUST NOT make any changes to the system
6. They MUST document the :ref:`return fields<return_block>` and :ref:`examples<examples_block>`

To create an info module:

1. Navigate to the correct directory for your new module: ``$ cd lib/ansible/modules/``. If you are developing module using collection, ``$ cd plugins/modules/`` inside your collection development tree
2. Create your new module file: ``$ touch my_test_info.py``
3. Paste the content below into your new info module file. It includes the :ref:`required Ansible format and documentation <developing_modules_documenting>` and some example code.
4. Modify and extend the code to do what you want your new info module to do. See the :ref:`programming tips <developing_modules_best_practices>` and :ref:`Python 3 compatibility <developing_python_3>` pages for pointers on writing clean and concise module code.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../examples/scripts/my_test_info.py
   :language: python

> The same way you can create ``my_test_facts.py`` module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the same process to create a facts module.
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../examples/scripts/my_test_facts.py
   :language: python

Creating a module
=================

To create a module:

> 1. Navigate to the correct directory for your new module: ``$ cd lib/ansible/modules/``. If you are developing module using collection, ``$ cd plugins/modules/`` inside your collection development tree

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the correct directory for your new module: ``$ cd lib/ansible/modules/``. If you are developing module using collection, ``$ cd plugins/modules/`` inside your collection development tree.
```

   ``$ . venv/bin/activate && . hacking/env-setup``

> Creating an info module

Reviewer 2: In the text, you sometimes write info and sometimes facts module, which is I think somewhat confusing, especially since they are related, but different things.
```suggestion
Creating an info or a facts module
```

=======================

> Ansible gather information about the target machines using facts modules.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ansible gather information about the target machines using info modules.
```

- would be good to put something that in general such new modules should be `_info` (have `_info` suffix) and why
- maybe it's also worth adding a note that before Ansible 2.* there were _facts modules that were renamed and using `_facts` is deprecated, etc.
- or if all info modules must have `_info` suffix without any exceptions (i'm not sure), alternatively, we could just replace all `_facts` with `_info`.

> Ansible gather information about the target machines using facts modules.

Reviewer 2: How about:
```suggestion
Ansible gathers information about the target machines using facts modules, and gathers information on other objects or files using info modules.
```

If you find yourself trying to add ``state: info`` or ``state: list`` to an existing module that is often a sign that a new dedicated ``_facts`` or ``_info`` module is needed.

> Facts modules, are just like any other Ansible Module, with a few minor requirements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Info and facts modules are just like any other Ansible Module, with a few minor requirements:
```

1. They MUST be named ``<something>_info`` or ``<something>_facts``, where <something> is singular

> 2. They MUST return facts in the form of the :ref:`result dictionary<common_return_values>` so other modules can access them

Reviewer 2: Info modules must **not** return facts.

3. They MUST support :ref:`check_mode <check_mode_dry>`
4. They MUST NOT make any changes to the system

> 5. They MUST document the :ref:`return fields<return_block>` including :ref:`examples<examples_block>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. They MUST document the :ref:`return fields<return_block>` and :ref:`examples<examples_block>`
```

To create an info module:

> 1. Navigate to the correct directory for your new module: ``$ cd lib/ansible/modules/``

Reviewer 2: This is only true for modules inside ansible/ansible. Since most people would be interested in creating info/facts modules in collections, I guess we should use `plugins/modules/` here?

2. Create your new module file: ``$ touch my_test_info.py``
3. Paste the content below into your new info module file. It includes the :ref:`required Ansible format and documentation <developing_modules_documenting>` and some example code.
4. Modify and extend the code to do what you want your new info module to do. See the :ref:`programming tips <developing_modules_best_practices>` and :ref:`Python 3 compatibility <developing_python_3>` pages for pointers on writing clean and concise module code.

.. code-block:: python

    #!/usr/bin/python

    # Copyright: (c) 2020, Your Name <YourName@example.org>
    # GNU General Public License v3.0+ (see COPYING or https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.txt)
    from __future__ import (absolute_import, division, print_function)
    __metaclass__ = type

    DOCUMENTATION = r'''
    ---
    module: my_test_info

    short_description: This is my test info module

>     version_added: "2.4"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    version_added: "2.11"
```
considering 2.10 is almost released:)

>     description:
>         - "This is my longer description explaining my test info module."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    description: This is my longer description explaining my test info module.
```

    options:
        name:

>             description:
>                 - This is the message to send to the test module.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            description: This is the message to send to the test module.
```

            required: true
            type: str

    author:
        - Your Name (@yourGitHubHandle)
    '''

    EXAMPLES = r'''
    # Pass in a message
    - name: Test with a message
      my_test_info:
        name: hello world
    '''

    RETURN = r'''
    original_message:

>         description: The original name param that was passed in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        description: The original name param that was passed in.
```

        type: str

>         returned: always
>     message:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        returned: always
    message:
```
would be good to add `sample:` to every returned value

>         description: The output message that the test module generates

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        description: The output message that the test module generates.
```

        type: str
        returned: always
    my_useful_info:

>         description: The dictionary containing information about your system

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        description: The dictionary containing information about your system.
```
according to the doc as far as i remember

        # this includes instantiation, a couple of common attr would be the
        # args/params passed to the execution, as well as if the module
        # supports check mode
        module = AnsibleModule(
            argument_spec=module_args,
            supports_check_mode=True
        )

        # if the user is working with this module in only check mode we do not
        # want to make any changes to the environment, just return the current
        # state with no modifications
        if module.check_mode:
            module.exit_json(**result)

        # manipulate or modify the state as needed (this is going to be the
        # part where your module will do what it needs to do)
        result['original_message'] = module.params['name']
        result['message'] = 'goodbye'
        result['my_useful_info'] = {
            'foo': 'bar',
            'answer': 42,
        }
        # in the event of a successful module execution, you will want to
        # simple AnsibleModule.exit_json(), passing the key/value results
        module.exit_json(**result)

    def main():
        run_module()

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()

> 

Reviewer 2: How about a few words of how a facts module differs from an info module? I.e. usually less / no module options, and return values inside `ansible_facts`, and also using `ansible_facts` in `RETURNS`? Maybe it's better two have two separate examples.

- Install the requirements (outside of your virtual environment): ``$ pip3 install -r ./test/lib/ansible_test/_data/requirements/units.txt``
- Run ``. hacking/env-setup``

> - To run all tests do the following: ``$ ansible-test units --python 3.5``. If you are using a CI enviornment, these tests will run automatically.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- To run all tests do the following: ``$ ansible-test units --python 3.5``. If you are using a CI environment, these tests will run automatically.
```
